Do you remember what you thought about all the
problems between, well, inter-service rivalry
was basically what we're talking about, wasn't
it? Well, at that time, why you're so low-ranking
and so far away, why you really doesn't, it doesn't
bother you at all. It's being a second lieutenant
in Hawaii and and something that's happened at
Langley Field or off of Langley Field. I think it's
just like a young child, things like that just get
so far away it really doesn't attract a lot of
attention. Because you were busy in a squadron and
you had all kinds of squadron jobs and community I
was system BX officer, base exchange officer, and
system mess officer, and communications
officer. I don't really, at the time, really was
impressed. Okay, this is also during the 1930s,
Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal. You had said
that you were happy that you had a job, but then
again you must have gone off the base. in Texas,
also in Illinois, and you must have seen some
poverty and some misery. Did the New Deal have any
impact on you at all or any of Roosevelt's
programs? Did you ever think about those? Were you
political? No. No, in fact
the first time I voted I guess was
I don't know, I think probably 63. Because you
were, well you were a resident of Texas and you
always were stationed there. Now other than
having a pay cut of 10 percent, it didn't really
affect you because you were in the valley. We were
in Hawaii, I was in Hawaii in four to thirty-six and
then from thirty-six to forty you were, I was at
Chinook Field in Illinois and you lived in the
small town of Paxton, Illinois and you lived in
Hawaii and you really didn't come in contact with
any poverty and your parents were farmers and
really it didn't seem that they were living any
differently than when you were home, when I was
home. Because you still had, they still had plenty
to eat and so it really wasn't impressive. Okay,
I'm wondering about why you decided to become
interested in the bombers instead of the
fighters? Or is that the military's decision?
Well, that was a recommendation of your
instructors and primaries and advanced over in at
Randolph. I guess it's a matter of size, physical
size, and
whether or not you were the wiry type or the relaxed
type. If you were the wiry type, you probably would
be better in fighters. But being relatively easy
going. Well, I guess bombers, I was very happy with
bombers. And what bombers did you learn? Well, we
had to be for the Keystone bomber and then we had a
modern Martin bomber in Hawaii and then I came back
to, well, Kelly when you had to transition about
ten hours I think it fighters that had been in
attack and observation. And of course when I flew
the fighter, which was a little single engine
aircraft, a Boeing P-12 I think it was, the crew
chief almost ground me. I didn't think I'd touch
the wing, but on the first time I flew the thing, and
the crew chief came out and and rocked it up and down
to the crack spar. So the next time I got in a fighter
was at Chanute, I reported in there from Hawaii.
And a guy named Spivey was operations officer and
he pointed to a P-12 out there and said, you know
you've had about three months at route or two
months at route so you're behind and you're
flying. So he said, you fly that thing for fifteen
hours. Well, not all at the same time, so I was very
leery of that fighter because last time I'd been in
it, I'd had an accident. But anyway, I flew it and
was very careful, and I didn't have any problems
with it. So while you were at Chinook, you flew
everything. You flew bombers, you had a B-18,
Douglas, I guess it was made that, and you had
fighters and you had observation planes. And
moved to Scott, you did the same thing. You flew
almost everything. What did you think of the
training in the Army Air Force? Well, I was part of
it. I spent nine years in the technical training
field. As a second lieutenant, what did you think
of the quality of the training? I mean, were they
good instructors? Well, when you As a second
lieutenant I reported to Luke Field of Wire, and
then of course you had a major as a commander. And I
would say that one of the most important phases of
an officer's life is who he has as a commander. When
he reports in, how much interest the commander has
in you as an individual. and his personality and
the interest he takes in your career. And then you
have more senior officers, captains and first
lieutenants who guide you around. You become
their wingman. So I'd say it's really high caliber
in
time. I mean the general Major Edwards, who later
became a lieutenant general, was my squaring
commander, and of course he would call me by my
first name, and he was very interested. And when I
went to Chanute, to a technical school, he said,
now Tex, go up there and don't study, just pass.
That's all you have to do. You don't want to be kept
there as an instructor, because that's the worst
thing that could happen to you, is to stay there as
an instructor. Well, I couldn't do that so when I
reported in I became the base exchange officer
until school started and that was about eight
months ahead of time. And then of course everybody
gets to know you and then I stayed there as an
instructor and then from there I became assistant
director and then finally director of the
technical school. And I liked that. In fact, from
that time on, mostly I was a boss. And I liked being
boss. You liked the education, the service school
aspect of the military. What did you like about it?
Well, I mean, it's a broadening type of thing. And
the other thing is you get a lot of management
training.
And actually the military is a very efficient
running operation. And so you have,
well my thesis,
my master's thesis is based on career development
of Air Force officers. And
I thought the Air Force did a pretty good job for me.
they sent me to technical school. I went to, came to
Randolph to learn how to fly an airplane on
instruments, or blind flying as they call it. And
developed the link trainer, the link trainer
programs. So you had a lot of of time and
opportunity to develop yourself. Sure. And then I
went to Scott and we moved the radio school from
Chinook to Scott and then I was selected to go to
Sioux Falls, South Dakota and I was a lieutenant
colonel at the time and I got a bunch of mostly
second lieutenants. And about sixty percent of
them were sergeants who were given direct
commissions as second lieutenants. So you have
yourself as lieutenant colonel and you have a
bunch of second lieutenants to organize and run a
school and it was just a lot of fun.
And we organized it and started built a school from
a piece of cornfield
to a capacity of about 10,000 students in one year.
That
I like pretty well. I didn't really like staff
work. I moved from there to technical training
command at Goldwood Field, North Carolina. and
then from there the headquarters training
command. I was at my best when I was out by myself.
When you were developing your own programs? When I
was developing my own programs and this type of
thing. Well what happened to the idea of getting in
the engineer corps? Well I said the Air Force got
into your blood so you were, you just dropped that
because,
see, in 36 You learn to fly and I love flying. Okay.
Tell me about your, you were the assistant
director of radio technical school 1939 to 1942.
What were your duties there? What does it mean
assistant director? Well, you had, well I think I
was about second command. I had Lud Bryan who was
who was the director and then I had myself and then I
had Charlie Richards who was a senior civilian
instructor. And your job then was primarily
developing expansion programs to take care of the
expanding Air Force. And so you were
going around, well at one time We were going to set
up a colored technical school, and I reported to
the governor of Alabama's office at the time to get
secret instructions. So, the three of us searched
the southeast for some school to to set up a
technical school. So we went to Howard University
in Atlanta, I think it is. And we thought it was a-
Fisk in Atlanta? Huh? Fisk in Atlanta? No, it was
Howard. Howard in Washington, D.C. isn't it? No,
that's a color school. There is a Howard
University down south someplace. Oh, okay. So we
went to it first because we thought it was a color
school. Well, it turned out to be a white school. So
they didn't- take to that very much. And after
visiting Emory University, we went to Tuskegee,
and that's where the school was finally
established. And
then we did a lot of planning on expanding the
technical schools. We opened one at Sioux Falls,
South Dakota, one in Madison, Wisconsin, one at
Scott and
one in Chicago, in one of the hotels, we took over
one of the big hotels in Chicago. And then we
selected instructors out of the graduating
classes and we took a cadre to Sioux Falls and
somebody else took a cadre to Madison, Wisconsin,
and another cadre, another individual took a
cadre to Chicago. And then you start training
students at Scott. And you're training second
lieutenants then? No. Or were you training
enlisted men? No, what you were training was
enlisted men. What you were doing, it was quite
easy. So you were getting, well, starting in 1940,
you started getting a lot of people into the
service. And we had the authority to select X
number of students out of the classes. So you'd get
these college graduates to be coming through as
radio students, and you'd just pick them up. Some
of them, sometimes they were instructors, and had
been teachers or something of this sort. And so you
pull them out of the line. And we established a
course for Chinese at Scott. And so we went up to
Chicago to the
Chinese
up there, and we had found a Chinese who had his
master's degree in electrical engineering.
Perfect. He could also speak the language of the
Canton, the Cantonese, or whatever it is that all
our Steelers were going to be. And so we got hired
him, brought him down, trained him, started
training him. Chinese wouldn't, they said, we
want to be trained by Chinese. We would have stayed
in Japan and China. We wanted to be trained by
Americans, so we had to
get Mr. Depew, who was one of our senior
instructors. He would speak to them in English,
and the same electrical engineer would interpret
what the guy said. Strange. But anyway, you got
into cars too. So what you were doing is setting up
training schools for radio men? Radio, yeah.
Radio mechanics and radio operators. The fly-in
bombers and other aircraft? The fly-in bombers
and ground, take care of ground stations and all
that type of thing. How long was the course?
Sixteen weeks. Sixteen weeks. Sixteen weeks,
normally for both the operator and the mechanic. I
bet your enrollment soared from the early 1940s
when we went into the war. Well, at Sioux Falls,
South Dakota,
Enrolled 850 every week. Wow. 850 every week.
That's
incredible. And you had to process them in and
process them out. And then of course we became
known as the best radio school in the Air Force, Air
Corps, because We would select our graduates as to
where they would go. I mean, with SAC or the
bombardment people in the Second Air Force who
were training cadres for overseas, if they're in
bombardment, we selected the best radio
operators and sent them. If they got a quarter of 50
out of the class, our first best operator would go
to them. And it backfired on us because then
the commander of the guys that would run these
cadres wanted all our students. Well if they got
all our students they got like everybody else was
sending them. So we kind of backed off on that one
and after I got to school And of course when we went
up Sioux Falls we went out and hired a bunch of
school teachers. We hired a tremendous number of
school teachers. Women who were teaching school
and brought them in, taught them radio and then
they already had teaching methods and knew how to
teach, how to handle students.
And so they turned out real well. Were they
civilian status? They were civilian, yeah. And at
that time you had to, we got directives to hire X
number of colored, X number of Chinese and
minority groups, even in 42. And I never had- To
hire them as instructors? As instructors, yeah.
And I never had any problem because I think you have
problems when you start talking about a problem. I
mean, I just, some of the schools, they segregated
the southern boys from the northern boys and put
them in the colored instructor's classes. And I
said, no, we'll just put everybody in the,
wherever they fall, that's where they're going to
fall. So we didn't talk about it. And normally the
colored instructors were the best anyway.
Really? Why is that? Why do you say that? Well, you
only hired the very best. I see. See, I mean, you had
instructors that you were pulling out of the
graduating classes. Some of them were just a high
school graduate. But here, the colored boys, the
colored instructors you were hiring, all of them
had their degree from college. Some of them had
their master's degree from college. So they were
better anyway. So we never had any problem. Never
had any problem whatsoever. No kidding? There was
no, I mean. No. You didn't have very many, you
didn't have any colored students going through
because at that time they were all sent to
Tuskegee.
Whereas you also, we had set up a system that every
two weeks you wash a student back so that you could
take all levels of intelligence. We had an army
general classification test that you could
predict to almost to the percentage point that
would graduate on time and which one would take
twice as long to get through school or what have
you. We set up a system so that every two weeks we'd
wash them back. And if they failed, we'd just wash
them back and then they'd go through. And if they
failed again, we'd wash them back again. And we
just kept them in school. And
the Army General Classification Test, I'm a great
believer in your aptitude test. I just think it
shows, because we We had thousands upon thousands
of students going through the technical systems
and we had IBM grading cards and established the
exams so that they were equal exams. One class
didn't get a harder exam than another so you had
maybe three or four different exams.
And you could tell when a guy enters almost when
he's going to graduate. But once they learned it,
most of them were good at that. I mean, they could be
there to be just as good an operator as the guy who
went through it the first time around. So I think
that our school system
should watch some of these boys back. But I don't
get any children back, but again you get into
social problems of where a guy 14 is in the 8th grade
or 6th grade and so he falls out, he drops out. I
don't know what the answer is. Well, it seems to me
then, let's get the record straight. You had women
instructors and you had black instructors and
these were civilians and you had regular military
Instructors. Instructors. Were they officers or
enlisted men? They were enlisted men mostly. They
were enlisted men. Yeah. Okay, you were training
enlisted men to become radio instructors and you
really didn't have any problems with the women or
the blacks or any of your instructors and the
relationship that they had with the men. Is that
true? No. Well, You always have a problem when you
get girls mixed up with boys. Oh, you mean in other
words, you said that you had no problems between
the whites and the blacks. No. But you did have
problems with the women and students. I would say
that there were military problems. I think there
were.
Well, I think you have a sex problem where you get
the opposite sex together. And every once in a
while, you would have
whether some girl inspector or female inspector
would be in some men's barracks or something of
this sort. But it wasn't a major problem.
Because most of the part they were very, very good.
And they were very, very conscientious and they
thought they were doing their job. I mean, doing
their job for the service. And we had quite a few of
them. I would say about a third of our instructors
were women. And how many, what percentage were
black? Oh, maybe three or four, not very many.
Three or four percent? Yeah, three or four, yeah.
And how many instructors did you have? Oh, maybe
I'd say about 400. And this is just up at Sioux
Falls? Yeah, up at Sioux Falls. Okay, now you were
the director of radar and radio, and this is
technical schools, and this was at Sioux Falls?
Yeah, it was a radio school. It was pure and simple a
radio school. Why did they call it radar and radio
technical school then? Well, see, we
established—see, I think I'd gone over to
England.
We had a radar school established at Scott,
which was what we call a pathfinder. There was a
radar bombing school. I took a trip after I left
Sioux Falls and got to the headquarters of
Technical Training Command in Fort Worth. I took a
90 day tour of England to study the radar systems
and air-sea rescue systems and how our students
were doing. And when I got back, I went down to Boca
Raton, Florida to run a radar school. Oh, I see. The
radar was separate from the radio. Okay, then you
were at Sioux Falls from, could you tell me what
years then you were there as the director? 42 to 43.
Okay, okay. So in 42 to 43 you were the director of
the radio school up at... At Sioux Falls and then 44
and 43 to 45, you were the director of the radar
school down in Florida. OK, well, were there
differences? Were there different scopes or
different problems that you had at these two
schools? Well, see, at the radio schools, we had
established a system so that if you're going to
talk about a spoon, everybody would have a spoon in
his hand. If you're talking about a glass, if
you're talking about a radio tube, well everybody
would have a tube in his hand. So that your method of
instruction was very, very practical.
So when that idea was put out by General Weaver,
then we grabbed it and ran with it up to Sioux Falls,
South Dakota. Now down at Keesler, it was an
airplane mechanics school, and then after I got to
his headquarters at Norwood Field, we went down
there one time and they were still teaching the
same theoretical. I mean they were gum beating is
what I'd call it, up before blackboard. So it was a
practical application in Sioux Falls with a radio
school. With a radar school, it was theoretical.
Getting to the mechanical school. So we were
ordered, well, we spent the night there, and he
ordered every chair out of every classroom
to be piled up outside. And then the next day he went
back, and all the students were standing up. And so
that's how he got... the mechanical school on a
practical basis. His idea was that if a guy was
learning about engines, then he had to have an
engine to work on. And if he unscrewed a nut off of an
engine, well then he'd lay it down here. That was
nut number one. That nut would be number two. And
then when that nut went back on, it went back on the
same thread as it came off of. Now this is kind of
ridiculous, But anyway, so after
that, why that became practical? Well, the radar
school was the most difficult to get into a
practical method of instruction. And I was sent
down to Boca Time, Florida to change it from a
theoretical school to a practical school. And you
had just returned from England? I had just
returned from England to find out that our radar
students were very good theorists, but they had
never seen the equipment before. So I went down
there. You mean your radar instructors? No, the
radar students who were being graduated. They
knew the theory, but they didn't know how to work on
the equipment. You're only out selecting me, and I
went down there to make this into a practical
school. And of course, you get into the situation
that you're the boss, but all the people who work
there are theorists. And they just say, Colonel,
there's no way of doing it that way.
And I say, well, there must be some way. So I started
selecting the the
combat crew officers, people who had gone to
England and completed their 30 missions or 50
missions, whatever it was, and had come back to the
States, and most of them were college graduates,
So we put them through the radar school, and I
started selecting them off the base. And then
every time a guy would say he can't do it, I would
say, I would put him on the shipping order. Next
time I get a directive to ship a radar officer off,
I'd ship him.